npm install
npm run dev

echo "# shop-billing-system" >> README.md
git init
git add .
git commit -m "first commit"
git branch -M main
git remote add origin https://github.com/bibekchandsah/shop-billing-system.git
git push -u origin main

git remote add origin https://github.com/bibekchandsah/shop-billing-system.git
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main

💻 Quick Commands
npm run dev      # Start dev server (already running)
npm run build    # Build for production
npm run preview  # Preview production build

🎯 Bill Design:
----------------------------------------------------------
                    Estimate Bill
                Garuda, Rautahat, Nepal

Bill No: BILL-0001          Date: 2080-10-01
Customer Name: John Doe
Address: Kathmandu          Contact: 9876543210

S.N.  Particulars    Qty.   Rate      Amount
1     Rice           10     50.00     500.00
2     Dal            5      120.00    600.00

                    Total Qty: 15 Total Amount:    Rs. 1,100.00

In Words: One Thousand One Hundred Rupees Only

Note: Thank you!

    Thank you for your business! Please come again.
--------------------------------------------------------------

nepali date library
number to words in amount
printing pdf of bill
saving data in database
creating user interface for billing system
generating reports for sales and inventory
exporting data to excel or csv format
implementing search functionality for products and customers
Designing a responsive layout for the billing system


Design:
1. User Interface: The billing system will have a user-friendly interface that allows users to easily navigate through different sections such as product management, customer management, and billing. The interface will be designed to be responsive, ensuring that it works well on both desktop and mobile devices.    
2. Product Management: The system will have a dedicated section for managing products, where users can add, edit, and delete products. Each product will have attributes such as name, price, quantity, and category. The system will also allow users to search for products based on their name, category, or price range. This will help users quickly find the products they need when creating bills or managing inventory.
3. Customer Management: The billing system will include a customer management module where users can add, edit, and delete customer information. Each customer will have attributes such as name, contact details, and purchase history. The system will also allow users to search for customers based on their name or contact information.
4. Billing: The billing module will enable users to create and manage bills for customers. Users can add products to the bill, specify quantities, and calculate the total amount. The system will also allow users to apply discounts and taxes to the bill. Once the bill is generated, users can print it as a PDF or save it in the database for future reference.
5. Reporting: The billing system will have a reporting feature that allows users to generate reports for sales and inventory. Users can view sales reports based on different time periods, such as daily, weekly, or monthly. The inventory report will show the current stock levels of products and alert users when stock is low.
6. Exporting Data: The system will provide an option to export data to Excel or CSV format. This will allow users to easily analyze and manipulate the data outside of the billing system. Users can export product lists, customer lists, and sales reports for further analysis.
7. Search Functionality: The billing system will implement a search functionality that allows users to quickly find products and customers. Users can search for products based on their name, category, or price range. Similarly, users can search for customers based on their name or contact information. This will help users save time and improve efficiency when managing their billing system.
8. Nepali Date Library: The billing system will incorporate a Nepali date library to handle date-related functionalities. This will allow users to input and display dates in the Nepali calendar format, which is commonly used in Nepal. The library will provide functions for converting between Nepali and Gregorian dates, as well as formatting dates according to Nepali conventions.
9. Number to Words in Amount: The billing system will include a feature that converts numerical amounts into words. This will be particularly useful for generating bills and invoices, as it provides a clear representation of the total amount in both numerical and written form. The system will support multiple languages, including English and Nepali, to cater to a wider user base. Users can choose their preferred language for the number-to-words conversion, ensuring that the billing system is accessible and user-friendly for all users. words in amount will be displayed on the bill and can also be included in the PDF generation for a comprehensive billing experience. words be like "One Lakh Fifty Nine Thousand Two Hundred Thirty Four Rupees Only" for the amount of 159234. This feature will enhance the clarity and professionalism of the bills generated by the system, making it easier for customers to understand the total amount due.
10. Printing PDF of Bill: The billing system will have the capability to generate and print bills in PDF format. This will allow users to easily share and store bills for their records. The PDF generation will include all relevant information such as customer details, product details, quantities, prices, discounts, taxes, and the total amount. Users can customize the layout and design of the PDF bill to match their branding and preferences. Additionally, the system will provide options for saving the generated PDF bills in the database for future reference or exporting them to external storage. The PDF generation will be implemented using a reliable library that supports various features such as formatting, styling, and embedding images. This will ensure that the generated bills are professional and visually appealing. Users will also have the option to print the PDF bills directly from the system, providing a seamless experience for managing their billing processes. Overall, the PDF generation feature will enhance the functionality and usability of the billing system, making it easier for users to create and manage their bills effectively.
11. Saving Data in Database: The billing system will utilize a database to store all relevant data, including product information, customer details, bills, and reports. This will ensure that the data is organized, secure, and easily accessible for future reference. The database will be designed to handle large volumes of data efficiently and will include features such as backup and recovery to prevent data loss. Users will be able to retrieve and manage their data through the user interface, allowing for seamless integration between the billing system and the database. The database will also support data integrity and consistency, ensuring that all information is accurate and up-to-date. This will enhance the overall functionality and reliability of the billing system, providing users with a robust solution for managing their billing processes effectively.


Estimate bill design: 

                        Estimate Bill
                    Garuda, Rautahat, Nepal

Bill No: input box          Date: input box (with Nepali date library integration)
Customer Name: input box
Address: input box          Contact Number: input box

S.N.                   Particulars    Qty.       Rate       Amount
Automatic/maually      input box      input box  input box  calculated amount
Automatic/maually      input box      input box  input box  calculated amount
Automatic/maually      input box      input box  input box  calculated amount
Automatic/maually      input box      input box  input box  calculated amount
Automatic/maually      input box      input box  input box  calculated amount
                                      Total Amount:         calculated amount (displayed in numerical)
In Words: Total amount (displayed in words format)
Payment Method: dropdown (Cash, Due, Mobile Payment, etc.)  Free Due: input box (for additional notes or instructions)

            Thank you for your business! Please come again.

Buttons: Add record, Generate PDF, Save Bill, Clear Form



record design:
Search by bill number, date, Customer Name,  address, contact number, total amount, or payment method
Display search results in a table format with columns for Bill No, Date, Customer Name, Total Amount, and Payment Method
Include options to view, edit, or delete each record in the search results & record details page
Bill No: from estimate bill data          Date: from estimate bill data (with Nepali date library integration)      Customer Name: from estimate bill data      Address: from estimate bill data          Contact Number: from estimate bill data       Total Amount: from estimate bill data (displayed in numerical)     Payment Method: from estimate bill data      Free Due: from estimate bill data  




✅ Core Features Implemented
Bill Creation System
    Auto-generated bill numbers (BILL-0001, BILL-0002...)
    Customer information (Name, Address, Contact)
    Dynamic item management (add/remove items)
    Automatic calculations (qty × rate = amount)
    Payment method selection
    Notes/instructions field
Bill Management:
    Search by multiple fields
    View detailed bill information
    Download PDF
    Delete bills
    Real-time updates
Nepali Date Support
    Full Nepali calendar integration
    Automatic date conversion
    Display in both English and Nepali dates
Number to Words
    Converts amounts to words (e.g., "One Lakh Fifty Nine Thousand Two Hundred Thirty Four Rupees Only")
    Indian numbering system (Lakh, Crore)
PDF Generation
    Professional bill format
    Business header with your details
    Itemized table
    Total in numbers and words
    Payment information
    Thank you footer
Database (Firebase)
    Secure cloud storage
    Real-time synchronization
    Create, Read, Delete operations
    Automatic timestamps
Records Management
    View all bills in table format
    Advanced search (by bill number, customer name, date, payment method, etc.)
    View detailed bill information
    Download PDFs
    Delete bills with confirmation
User Interface
    Modern, clean design
    Fully responsive (works on desktop, tablet, mobile)
    Light, Dark, and System themes
    Smooth animations
    Intuitive navigation

📚 Complete Documentation
    QUICK_START.md - 5-minute setup guide
    README.md - Complete overview and setup
    USER_GUIDE.md - Comprehensive user manual
    FIREBASE_SETUP.md - Firebase configuration guide
    DEPLOYMENT.md - Deployment to various platforms
    CONTRIBUTING.md - Developer guidelines
    PROJECT_SUMMARY.md - Technical overview
    CHANGELOG.md - Version history
    IMPLEMENTATION_COMPLETE.md - Implementation checklist
    DOCUMENTATION_INDEX.md - Documentation guide

Enable Firestore Database:
    Go to Firebase Console
    Select project: shopbillingsystem
    Click "Firestore Database" (left sidebar)
    Click "Create database"
    Choose "Start in test mode"
    Select location: asia-south1 (closest to Nepal)
    Click "Enable"

Update Firestore security rules
    Go to Firebase Console
    Select: shopbillingsystem
    Click: Firestore Database → Rules tab
    Replace everything with:
        rules_version = '2';
        service cloud.firestore {
          match /databases/{database}/documents {
            match /{document=**} {
              allow read, write: if true;
            }
          }
        }
    Click "Publish"

✅ Toast Notification System Implemented!
upgraded  alert system to use toast notifications that appear in the bottom-right corner of the screen!
    Toasts appear in bottom-right corner (fixed position)
    Always visible even when scrolled down ✅
    Multiple toasts can stack
    Auto-dismiss after 5 seconds
    Manual close button (X)
    Smooth slide-in animations
    Responsive (full width on mobile)
🎨 Features
    Fixed Position - Bottom-right corner, always visible
    Auto-dismiss - Disappears after 5 seconds
    Manual Close - Click X to close immediately
    Stacking - Multiple toasts stack vertically
    Animations - Smooth slide-in from right
    Hover Effect - Slightly moves left on hover
    Icons - Each type has a unique icon (✓, ✗, ⚠, ℹ)
    Responsive - Adapts to mobile screens
    Theme Support - Works with Light/Dark/System themes
🎨 Toast Types
    Success (Green) - "Bill saved successfully!"
    Error (Red) - "Failed to save bill"
    Info (Blue) - General information
    Warning (Yellow) - Caution messages
📱 Responsive Design
    Desktop/Tablet:
        Position: Bottom-right corner
        Width: 320px minimum
    Mobile:
        Position: Bottom center
        Full width with margins
        Stacks vertically

Light → Dark → System → Light → …
The button shows the current theme's icon + label (e.g. ☀ Light, 🌙 Dark, 🖥 System). Hovering shows a tooltip with what it'll switch to next. On mobile it stretches full-width at the bottom of the nav.

Button inline feedback
Save Bill — after a successful save, the button instantly changes to a green ✓ Saved state for 2 seconds, then resets back to "Save Bill".
Clear Form — after clearing, the button shows ✓ Cleared for 2 seconds, then resets.

https://nepalidate.omkumarpandey.com.np/datepicker.html
Polls for the CDN script to load, then calls NepaliDatePicker.init()
Automatically sets today's BS date on mount
Syncs dark/light mode with your theme toggle (calls setDark() whenever the theme changes)
Clears itself when value is reset to empty (on Clear Form)
Returns both the BS date (2081-05-15) and the equivalent AD date (2024-08-30) via onChange(bs, ad)

Behaviour:
    Click the input → Bikram Sambat calendar opens with bilingual labels
    Pick a date → both BS and AD are stored internally
    Theme toggle → calendar dark mode follows automatically
    Clear Form → picker resets to today's da

Address column
The table now has an Address column between Customer Name and Contact. Long addresses are truncated with … to keep the table tidy — the full value is always visible in the view/edit modal.

Edit button (amber/warning colour)
A pencil icon button sits between View and Download in the Actions column. Clicking it opens the Edit Bill modal.

Edit modal
A full-width modal (up to 1000px) with all editable fields:
    Bill Information — Bill No, Nepali Date picker (same picker as Create Bill, pre-filled with the existing date)
    Customer Information — Name, Address, Contact Number
    Items — full editable table with Add/Remove rows, auto-calculated amounts
    Live total + In Words — updates as you type
    Payment — Payment Method dropdown, Note/Free Due
Clicking Save Changes calls updateBill() in Firebase, shows a success toast, closes the modal, and refreshes the table. Validation runs the same rules as Create Bill.

Print button (cyan, printer icon) sits next to "Generate PDF" in the form actions. It validates the form the same way — customer name and at least one valid item required.

Print Preview modal opens with:
    A clean A4-style white bill layout showing all bill data — header, business name/address, bill meta (BS date, AD date, customer, address, contact), items table with filler rows so it always looks full, total row, amount in words, payment method, note, and the thank-you footer
    A toolbar at the top (hidden during print) with "Print / Save PDF" and "Close" buttons
    Clicking outside the modal closes it
"Print / Save PDF" calls window.print() which opens the browser's native print dialog. From there the user can:
    Send to a physical printer
    Save as PDF (via "Save as PDF" destination in Chrome/Edge/Firefox)
    Choose paper size, orientation, margins
Print CSS (@media print) hides everything on the page except #printable-bill, removes all shadows/borders from the modal chrome, and sets @page to A4 portrait with 1.5cm margins. Table header background and borders are forced to print with -webkit-print-color-adjust: exact.

Only BS date shown
    Print preview: shows Date: 2081-05-15 (BS only)
    PDF generator: shows Date: 2081-05-15 (BS only, with || '—' fallback)
    Label on the picker changed from "Date (BS / AD)" to "Date (BS)"

Bill No: BILL-0001                    Date: 2080-10-01
Customer Name: John Doe
Address: Kathmandu                    Contact: 9876543210

Print preview (printBill.ts) — uses a CSS grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr so Bill No and Date sit on the same line, Customer Name spans the full width, and Address and Contact share the next line with Contact right-aligned.

PDF (pdfGenerator.ts) — uses jsPDF's x-coordinate positioning: labels are bold, values are normal weight. Bill No at x=15, Date label at x=130; Customer Name at x=15 spanning full width; Address at x=15, Contact label at x=130 — matching the same visual rhythm.


┌─────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┐
│ Bill No: [___________]  │ Date (BS): [___________] │
├─────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┤
│ Customer Name: [_________________________________] │
├─────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┤
│ Address: [___________]  │ Contact Number: [______] │
└─────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┘
Row 1 — Bill No on the left, Date picker on the right (grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr)
Row 2 — Customer Name spans the full width (no grid, just a plain form-group)
Row 3 — Address on the left, Contact Number on the right (same two-column grid)
On mobile (≤768px) both meta rows collapse to a single column so nothing gets cramped. The form max-width is also tightened to 1000px to keep it proportional to the bill design.

 


today sale | bill today | today customer | stock quantity
month sale | bill month | month customer | low stock
total sale | toatl bill | total customer | out of stock



✅ DEVICE SESSION MANAGEMENT & SECURITY FEATURE IMPLEMENTED!
Complete device tracking and security management system added to Settings page:

🔐 Security Features:
    Device Session Tracking - Automatically tracks each login with device information (browser, OS, IP)
    Active Sessions List - View all currently active sessions with device details
    Session Revocation - Revoke access from specific devices or all other devices at once
    Password Change Security - Change password with automatic logout from all devices
    Real-time Activity Tracking - Updates last activity timestamp for each session
    
📱 Device Information Captured:
    Browser Detection - Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge, Opera
    OS Detection - Windows (7/8/8.1/10/11), macOS, iOS, Android, Linux
    Device Type - Desktop, Mobile, Tablet indicators
    IP Address - Retrieved via ipify.org API
    Last Activity - Real-time "time ago" formatting (e.g., "5 minutes ago", "2 hours ago")
    
🎨 User Interface:
    Settings Page → Device Sessions & Security section
    Card-based session list with device icons
    Current device badge to identify your active session
    One-click revoke buttons for each session
    "Logout All Other Devices" bulk action
    Password change form with validation
    Warning messages for security-critical actions
    Loading and empty states
    
🔧 Technical Implementation:
    sessionService.ts - Complete session management service
        createSession() - Auto-create on login
        getUserSessions() - Fetch all active sessions
        revokeSession() - Delete specific session
        revokeOtherSessions() - Bulk revoke except current
        revokeAllSessions() - Force logout all (password change)
        updateSessionActivity() - Track last activity
        getCurrentSessionId() - Get current session ID
    
    AuthContext Updates:
        changePassword() - New method with re-authentication
        Enhanced login methods to create sessions
        Session activity tracking in onAuthStateChanged
        localStorage integration for session IDs
    
    Database Structure (Firestore):
        /users/{userId}/sessions/{sessionId}
            - userId, deviceName, browser, os
            - ipAddress, userAgent
            - lastActive, createdAt timestamps
    
🎯 User Workflows:
    View Sessions - Navigate to Settings → scroll to Device Sessions
    Revoke Session - Click X button on any device → confirm → logged out
    Logout All Others - One button → confirm → only current device remains
    Change Password - Fill form → all devices logged out → login again
    
💡 Security Benefits:
    ✓ Users can identify and remove unauthorized access
    ✓ See where they're logged in at a glance
    ✓ Manage all sessions from one place
    ✓ Password changes automatically secure all devices
    ✓ Transparency about last activity time
    
📚 Documentation:
    DEVICE_SESSION_MANAGEMENT.md - Complete feature documentation
        - Overview and features
        - User interface details
        - Security implementation
        - User workflows
        - Technical details
        - Best practices
        
🎨 Responsive Design:
    Desktop - Sessions in card grid, full details visible
    Tablet - Adjusted spacing and buttons
    Mobile - Stacked layout, full-width cards
    Theme Support - Works with Light/Dark/System themes
    
✨ Additional Features:
    Confirmation dialogs before revoking sessions
    Success/error toast notifications
    Real-time session updates after actions
    Automatic session cleanup on password change
    Session persistence across page reloads
    Intelligent browser and device detection
